The day the Bank of England took on George Soros and lost has gone down in history as Black Wednesday, but the label is ill-deserved. In fact, 16 September 1992 was liberation day for the UK economy, which was slowly being strangled by membership of the European exchange rate mechanism, the forerunner of the single currency. The effects of that momentous 24 hours live on two decades later. Without Black Wednesday, Tony Blair would never have become prime minister, there would have been no monetary policy committee, and Britain, in all likelihood, would have been part of monetary union. David Cameron, who can be seen in the footage of Norman Lamont announcing Britain's exit from the ERM as the autumn night closed in around the Treasury, would still be a young MP working his way up through the Conservative ranks. British politics was turned on its head as a result of the humiliation of John Major's government. Labour had just suffered its fourth straight general election defeat in April 1992 and, deep down, its leaders thought it possible they would never form a majority administration again. In 1997, Blair won the biggest victory in Labour's history and went on to do what Attlee and Wilson had never managed: to serve two full terms in Downing Street. By contrast, the Conservative brand suffered permanent damage. The four election victories from 1979 and 1992 were not because the Conservatives being liked, but because they had the reputation for being more competent managers of the economy than a Labour party still tainted by the austerity programme imposed on Britain by the International Monetary Fund in 1976. That reputation was shredded when the Major government surrendered to the power of financial speculation and, despite the strong bounce in the economy between late 1992 and May 1997, voters neither forgave nor forgot. For the Conservatives, if not the country, it was indeed Black Wednesday. The economic and political crisis of September 1992 had its origins in the raging boom of 1987 and 1988. Until then, the government of Margaret Thatcher had believed it had cracked Britain's long-term economic problems, with several years of strong growth and low inflation in the mid-80s. The then chancellor, Nigel Lawson, decided that the best way to keep the cost of living in check was for the pound to shadow the German mark, believing that this would import Teutonic anti-inflationary zeal into the UK. It was a policy disaster. Interest rates were cut to prevent sterling from rising and this led to an orgy of mortgage borrowing. House prices rose sharply and so did inflation, from a trough of just over 2% in 1986 to almost 10% in 1990. By that point Lawson had gone, but his successor – Major – decided that the way for Britain to kick its inflation habit for good was to join the ERM, a device by which European currencies had to trade within fixed bands against the mark. The central point of the UK's band was DM2.95 and it was only allowed to fluctuate by 6% in either direction – from DM2.78 to DM3.13. The Treasury was convinced that ERM membership would provide a solid anchor for monetary policy, and the decision to join in October 1990 was welcomed by all three main political parties, the CBI and the TUC. Unfortunately, two things conspired to wreck the ERM experiment. Firstly, at that very moment the economy was plunging into a deep recession triggered by a doubling of interest rates from 7.5% in the summer of 1988 to 15% in the autumn of 1989. Unemployment rose sharply and many of those who had bought homes during the boom found themselves out of work, unable to pay their mortgages and sitting in homes worth a lot less than they had paid for them. Repossessions rose to record levels, as did bankruptcies. The second factor was the reunification of Germany at the end of the cold war, which led to rapid growth and upward pressure on inflation in 1991 and 1992. Germany's central bank, the Bundesbank, raised interest rates and this made the mark more attractive to investors, leading to an increase in its value. Countries that had their currencies pegged to the mark came under pressure to raise their own rates in order to keep within their ERM bands. By the summer of 1992, the Major government was facing a dilemma. The poor state of the domestic economy – with the jobless count heading towards three million for the second time in a decade – necessitated cutting interest rates. However, the discipline of ERM membership meant there was pressure to raise them. Major and Lamont insisted that there was not the slightest possible chance of this dilemma being resolved by Britain leaving the ERM, issuing a stream of increasingly defiant speeches culminating in one by the prime minister to the Scottish CBI in Glasgow six days before Black Wednesday in which he attacked those peddling "quack doctor" remedies. "The soft option, the devaluer's option, the inflationary option, in my judgment that would be a betrayal of our future at this moment, and I tell you categorically that is not the government's policy," Major said to applause. The government did its best to avoid the "soft option". Lamont pleaded with the Germans to cut rates. They refused. The British government made large-scale intervention in markets as the pound dropped towards DM2.77. The pound refused to budge. And on Black Wednesday itself, there was an announcement that interest rates were being raised from 10% to 12%. When that failed to stem the tidal wave of selling, Lamont announced that rates would go to 15% the following morning. In truth, this marked the moment when the white flag of surrender was raised above the Treasury and the Bank, because the financial markets knew that Lamont could not implement rates of 15% without completely wrecking the economy. The London stock market rallied before the close. By the next morning, the government was making the best of things. Interest rates were cut and continued to come down until they stood at 6% by early 1993. Home loans became easier to finance and consumers had more disposable income to spend. Outside the ERM, the pound fell by 15%, making British exports cheaper. A 16-year long period of continuous expansion began almost immediately. A number of key lessons were provided by Black Wednesday. The government had, at various times, tried to cut borrowing, restrict different measures of the money supply, shadowed the mark and joined the ERM in the hope of securing low and stable inflation. Now it decided to target low and stable inflation directly through an inflation target. The monetary framework that exists today had its genesis on 16 September 1992. Politicians of both parties also realised that ceding control over interest rates and the exchange rate was a risky business. The fact that the UK economy was not aligned with the German economy in 1992 meant the Major government was forced to import an entirely inappropriate set of policies. When the time came to decide whether Britain should join the single currency in 2003, Gordon Brown wisely insisted that the UK economy should show convergence with the other members and be flexible enough to cope with unexpected shocks as conditions of membership. A third lesson was that it was impossible for governments running dumb economic policies to resist the power of the financial markets. Major and his ministers dug their own grave by insisting, in the face of the evidence, that the policy was going to plan and could not be altered under any circumstances. That lesson has, perhaps, not been so well learnt.